README.md, before:

# pydgraph

Official Dgraph client implementation for Python (Python >= v2.7 and >= v3.5),
using [grpc].

[grpc]: https://grpc.io/

This client follows the [Dgraph Go client][goclient] closely.

**Use [Discuss Issues](https://discuss.dgraph.io/c/issues/35/clients/46) for reporting issues about this repository.**

[goclient]: https://github.com/dgraph-io/dgo
Before using this client, we highly recommend that you go through [docs.dgraph.io],
and understand how to run and work with Dgraph.

[docs.dgraph.io]:https://docs.dgraph.io

## Table of contents

- [Install](#install)
- [Supported Versions](#supported-versions)
- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
- [Using a Client](#using-a-client)
  - [Creating a Client](#creating-a-client)
  - [Altering the Database](#altering-the-database)
  - [Creating a Transaction](#creating-a-transaction)
  - [Running a Mutation](#running-a-mutation)
  - [Committing a Transaction](#committing-a-transaction)
  * [Running a Query](#running-a-query)
  * [Running an Upsert: Query + Mutation](#running-an-upsert-query--mutation)
  * [Running a Conditional Upsert](#running-a-conditional-upsert)
  - [Cleaning up Resources](#cleaning-up-resources)
  - [Setting Metadata Headers](#setting-metadata-headers)
- [Examples](#examples)
- [Development](#development)
  - [Building the source](#building-the-source)
  - [Running tests](#running-tests)

## Install

Install using pip:

```sh
pip install pydgraph
```

## Supported Versions

Depending on the version of Dgraph that you are connecting to, you will have to
use a different version of this client.

| Dgraph version |   pydgraph version   |
|:--------------:|:--------------------:|
|     1.0.X      |      <= *1.2.0*      |
|     1.1.X      |      >= *2.0.0*      |
|     1.2.X      |      >= *2.0.0*      |

## Quickstart

Build and run the [simple][] project in the `examples` folder, which
contains an end-to-end example of using the Dgraph python client. Follow the
instructions in the README of that project.

[simple]: ./examples/simple

## Using a client

### Creating a Client

You can initialize a `DgraphClient` object by passing it a list of
`DgraphClientStub` clients as variadic arguments. Connecting to multiple Dgraph
servers in the same cluster allows for better distribution of workload.

The following code snippet shows just one connection.

```python
import pydgraph

client_stub = pydgraph.DgraphClientStub('localhost:9080')
client = pydgraph.DgraphClient(client_stub)
```

### Altering the Database

To set the schema, create an `Operation` object, set the schema and pass it to
`DgraphClient#alter(Operation)` method.

```python
schema = 'name: string @index(exact) .'
op = pydgraph.Operation(schema=schema)
client.alter(op)
```

Starting Dgraph version 20.03.0, indexes can be computed in the background.
You can set `run_in_background` field of the `pydgraph.Operation` to `True`
before passing it to the `Alter` function. You can find more details
[here](https://docs.dgraph.io/master/query-language/#indexes-in-background).

```python
schema = 'name: string @index(exact) .'
op = pydgraph.Operation(schema=schema, run_in_background=True)
client.alter(op)
```

`Operation` contains other fields as well, including drop predicate and drop all.
Drop all is useful if you wish to discard all the data, and start from a clean
slate, without bringing the instance down.

```python
# Drop all data including schema from the Dgraph instance. This is a useful
# for small examples such as this since it puts Dgraph into a clean state.
op = pydgraph.Operation(drop_all=True)
client.alter(op)
```

### Creating a Transaction

To create a transaction, call `DgraphClient#txn()` method, which returns a
new `Txn` object. This operation incurs no network overhead.

It is good practice to call `Txn#discard()` in a `finally` block after running
the transaction. Calling `Txn#discard()` after `Txn#commit()` is a no-op
and you can call `Txn#discard()` multiple times with no additional side-effects.

```python
txn = client.txn()
try:
  # Do something here
  # ...
finally:
  txn.discard()
  # ...
```

To create a read-only transaction, call `DgraphClient#txn(read_only=True)`.
Read-only transactions are ideal for transactions which only involve queries.
Mutations and commits are not allowed.

```python
txn = client.txn(read_only=True)
try:
  # Do some queries here
  # ...
finally:
  txn.discard()
  # ...
```

To create a read-only transaction that executes best-effort queries, call
`DgraphClient#txn(read_only=True, best_effort=True)`. Best-effort queries are
faster than normal queries because they bypass the normal consensus protocol.
For this same reason, best-effort queries cannot guarantee to return the latest
data. Best-effort queries are only supported by read-only transactions.

### Running a Mutation

`Txn#mutate(mu=Mutation)` runs a mutation. It takes in a `Mutation` object,
which provides two main ways to set data: JSON and RDF N-Quad. You can choose
whichever way is convenient.

`Txn#mutate()` provides convenience keyword arguments `set_obj` and `del_obj`
for setting JSON values and `set_nquads` and `del_nquads` for setting N-Quad
values. See examples below for usage.

We define a person object to represent a person and use it in a transaction.

```python
# Create data.
p = {
    'name': 'Alice',
}

# Run mutation.
txn.mutate(set_obj=p)

# If you want to use a mutation object, use this instead:
# mu = pydgraph.Mutation(set_json=json.dumps(p).encode('utf8'))
# txn.mutate(mu)

# If you want to use N-Quads, use this instead:
# txn.mutate(set_nquads='_:alice <name> "Alice" .')
```

```python
# Delete data.

query = """query all($a: string)
 {
   all(func: eq(name, $a))
    {
      uid
    }
  }"""

variables = {'$a': 'Bob'}

res = txn.query(query, variables=variables)
ppl = json.loads(res.json)

# For a mutation to delete a node, use this:
txn.mutate(del_obj=person)
```

For a complete example with multiple fields and relationships, look at the
[simple] project in the `examples` folder.

Sometimes, you only want to commit a mutation, without querying anything further.
In such cases, you can set the keyword argument `commit_now=True` to indicate
that the mutation must be immediately committed.

A mutation can be executed using `txn.do_request` as well.

```python
mutation = txn.create_mutation(set_nquads='_:alice <name> "Alice" .')
request = txn.create_request(mutations=[mutation], commit_now=True)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Committing a Transaction

A transaction can be committed using the `Txn#commit()` method. If your transaction
consisted solely of calls to `Txn#query` or `Txn#queryWithVars`, and no calls to
`Txn#mutate`, then calling `Txn#commit()` is not necessary.

An error is raised if another transaction(s) modify the same data concurrently that was
modified in the current transaction. It is up to the user to retry transactions
when they fail.

```python
txn = client.txn()
try:
  # ...
  # Perform any number of queries and mutations
  # ...
  # and finally...
  txn.commit()
except Exception as e:
  if isinstance(e, pydgraph.AbortedError):
    # Retry or handle exception.
  else:
    raise e
finally:
  # Clean up. Calling this after txn.commit() is a no-op
  # and hence safe.
  txn.discard()
```

### Running a Query

You can run a query by calling `Txn#query(string)`. You will need to pass in a
GraphQL+- query string. If you want to pass an additional dictionary of any
variables that you might want to set in the query, call
`Txn#query(string, variables=d)` with the variables dictionary `d`.

The response would contain the field `json`, which returns the response JSON.

Let’s run a query with a variable `$a`, deserialize the result from JSON and
print it out:

```python
# Run query.
query = """query all($a: string) {
  all(func: eq(name, $a))
  {
    name
  }
}"""
variables = {'$a': 'Alice'}

res = txn.query(query, variables=variables)

# If not doing a mutation in the same transaction, simply use:
# res = client.txn(read_only=True).query(query, variables=variables)

ppl = json.loads(res.json)

# Print results.
print('Number of people named "Alice": {}'.format(len(ppl['all'])))
for person in ppl['all']:
  print(person)
```

This should print:

```console
Number of people named "Alice": 1
Alice
```

You can also use `txn.do_request` function to run the query.

```python
request = txn.create_request(query=query)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Running an Upsert: Query + Mutation

The `txn.do_request` function allows you to run upserts consisting of one query and
one mutation. Query variables could be defined and can then be used in the mutation.

To know more about upsert, we highly recommend going through the docs at
https://docs.dgraph.io/mutations/#upsert-block.

```python
query = """{
  u as var(func: eq(name, "Alice"))
}"""
nquad = """
  uid(u) <name> "Alice" .
  uid(u) <age> "25" .
"""
mutation = txn.create_mutation(set_nquads=nquad)
request = txn.create_request(query=query, mutations=[mutation], commit_now=True)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Running a Conditional Upsert

The upsert block also allows specifying a conditional mutation block using an `@if` directive. The mutation is executed
only when the specified condition is true. If the condition is false, the mutation is silently ignored.

See more about Conditional Upsert [Here](https://docs.dgraph.io/mutations/#conditional-upsert).

```python
query = """
  {
    user as var(func: eq(email, "wrong_email@dgraph.io"))
  }
"""
cond = "@if(eq(len(user), 1))"
nquads = """
  uid(user) <email> "correct_email@dgraph.io" .
"""
mutation = txn.create_mutation(cond=cond, set_nquads=nquads)
request = txn.create_request(mutations=[mutation], query=query, commit_now=True)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Cleaning Up Resources

To clean up resources, you have to call `DgraphClientStub#close()` individually for
all the instances of `DgraphClientStub`.

```python
SERVER_ADDR = "localhost:9080"

# Create instances of DgraphClientStub.
stub1 = pydgraph.DgraphClientStub(SERVER_ADDR)
stub2 = pydgraph.DgraphClientStub(SERVER_ADDR)

# Create an instance of DgraphClient.
client = pydgraph.DgraphClient(stub1, stub2)

# ...
# Use client
# ...

# Clean up resources by closing all client stubs.
stub1.close()
stub2.close()
```

### Setting Metadata Headers
Metadata headers such as authentication tokens can be set through the metadata of gRPC methods. Below is an example of how to set a header named "auth-token".
```python
# The following piece of code shows how one can set metadata with
# auth-token, to allow Alter operation, if the server requires it.
# metadata is a list of arbitrary key-value pairs.
metadata = [("auth-token", "the-auth-token-value")]
dg.alter(op, metadata=metadata)
```

### Setting a timeout.

A timeout value representing the number of seconds can be passed to the `login`,
`alter`, `query`, and `mutate` methods using the `timeout` keyword argument.

For example, the following alters the schema with a timeout of ten seconds:
`dg.alter(op, timeout=10)`

### Passing credentials

A `CallCredentials` object can be passed to the `login`, `alter`, `query`, and
`mutate` methods using the `credentials` keyword argument.

### Async methods.

The `alter` method in the client has an asyncronous version called
`async_alter`. The async methods return a future. You can directly call the
`result` method on the future. However. The DgraphClient class provides a static
method `handle_alter_future` to handle any possible exception.

```
alter_future = self.client.async_alter(pydgraph.Operation(
	schema="name: string @index(term) ."))
response = pydgraph.DgraphClient.handle_alter_future(alter_future)
```

The `query` and `mutate` methods int the `Txn` class also have async versions
called `async_query` and `async_mutation` respectively. These functions work
just like `async_alter`.

You can use the `handle_query_future` and `handle_mutate_future` static methods
in the `Txn` class to retrieve the result. A short example is given below:

```
txn = client.txn()
query = "query body here"
future = txn.async_query()
response = pydgraph.Txn.handle_query_future(future)
```

A working example can be found in the `test_asycn.py` test file.

Keep in mind that due to the nature of async calls, the async functions cannot
retry the request if the login is invalid. You will have to check for this error
and retry the login (with the function `retry_login` in both the `Txn` and
`Client` classes). A short example is given below:

```python
client = DgraphClient(client_stubs) # client_stubs is a list of gRPC stubs.
alter_future = client.async_alter()
try:
    response = alter_future.result()
except Exception as e:
	# You can use this function in the util package to check for JWT
    # expired errors.
    if pydgraph.util.is_jwt_expired(e):
        # retry your request here.
```

## Examples

- [simple][]: Quickstart example of using pydgraph.

## Development

### Building the source

```sh
python setup.py install
# To install for the current user, use this instead:
# python setup.py install --user
```

If you have made changes to the `pydgraph/proto/api.proto` file, you need need
to regenerate the source files generated by Protocol Buffer tools. To do that,
install the [grpcio-tools][grpcio-tools] library and then run the following
command:

[grpcio-tools]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/grpcio-tools

```sh
python scripts/protogen.py
```

The generated file `api_pb2_grpc.py` needs to be changed in recent versions of python.
The required change is outlined below as a diff.

```
-import api_pb2 as api__pb2
+from . import api_pb2 as api__pb2
```

### Running tests

To run the tests in your local machine, you can run the script
`scripts/local-tests.sh`. This script assumes Dgraph and dgo (Go client) are
already built on the local machine and that their code is in `$GOPATH/src`.
It also requires that docker and docker-compose are installed in your machine.

The script will take care of bringing up a Dgraph cluster and bringing it down
after the tests are executed. The script uses the port 9180 by default to
prevent interference with clusters running on the default port. Docker and
docker-compose need to be installed before running the script. Refer to the
official Docker documentation for instructions on how to install those packages.

The `test.sh` script downloads and installs Dgraph. It is meant for use by our
CI systems and using it for local development is not recommended.

Commit message:

Add section on authentication of TLS reverse proxies.
Add a section on how to authenticate pydgraph when the Dgraph instance
is behind a reverse TLS proxy.

Taken from the gRPC section in
https://graphql.dgraph.io/slash-graphql/advanced-queries/

README.md, after:

# pydgraph

Official Dgraph client implementation for Python (Python >= v2.7 and >= v3.5),
using [grpc].

[grpc]: https://grpc.io/

This client follows the [Dgraph Go client][goclient] closely.

**Use [Discuss Issues](https://discuss.dgraph.io/c/issues/35/clients/46) for reporting issues about this repository.**

[goclient]: https://github.com/dgraph-io/dgo
Before using this client, we highly recommend that you go through [docs.dgraph.io],
and understand how to run and work with Dgraph.

[docs.dgraph.io]:https://docs.dgraph.io

## Table of contents

- [Install](#install)
- [Supported Versions](#supported-versions)
- [Quickstart](#quickstart)
- [Using a Client](#using-a-client)
  - [Creating a Client](#creating-a-client)
  - [Altering the Database](#altering-the-database)
  - [Creating a Transaction](#creating-a-transaction)
  - [Running a Mutation](#running-a-mutation)
  - [Committing a Transaction](#committing-a-transaction)
  * [Running a Query](#running-a-query)
  * [Running an Upsert: Query + Mutation](#running-an-upsert-query--mutation)
  * [Running a Conditional Upsert](#running-a-conditional-upsert)
  - [Cleaning up Resources](#cleaning-up-resources)
  - [Setting Metadata Headers](#setting-metadata-headers)
- [Examples](#examples)
- [Development](#development)
  - [Building the source](#building-the-source)
  - [Running tests](#running-tests)

## Install

Install using pip:

```sh
pip install pydgraph
```

## Supported Versions

Depending on the version of Dgraph that you are connecting to, you will have to
use a different version of this client.

| Dgraph version |   pydgraph version   |
|:--------------:|:--------------------:|
|     1.0.X      |      <= *1.2.0*      |
|     1.1.X      |      >= *2.0.0*      |
|     1.2.X      |      >= *2.0.0*      |

## Quickstart

Build and run the [simple][] project in the `examples` folder, which
contains an end-to-end example of using the Dgraph python client. Follow the
instructions in the README of that project.

[simple]: ./examples/simple

## Using a client

### Creating a Client

You can initialize a `DgraphClient` object by passing it a list of
`DgraphClientStub` clients as variadic arguments. Connecting to multiple Dgraph
servers in the same cluster allows for better distribution of workload.

The following code snippet shows just one connection.

```python
import pydgraph

client_stub = pydgraph.DgraphClientStub('localhost:9080')
client = pydgraph.DgraphClient(client_stub)
```

### Altering the Database

To set the schema, create an `Operation` object, set the schema and pass it to
`DgraphClient#alter(Operation)` method.

```python
schema = 'name: string @index(exact) .'
op = pydgraph.Operation(schema=schema)
client.alter(op)
```

Starting Dgraph version 20.03.0, indexes can be computed in the background.
You can set `run_in_background` field of the `pydgraph.Operation` to `True`
before passing it to the `Alter` function. You can find more details
[here](https://docs.dgraph.io/master/query-language/#indexes-in-background).

```python
schema = 'name: string @index(exact) .'
op = pydgraph.Operation(schema=schema, run_in_background=True)
client.alter(op)
```

`Operation` contains other fields as well, including drop predicate and drop all.
Drop all is useful if you wish to discard all the data, and start from a clean
slate, without bringing the instance down.

```python
# Drop all data including schema from the Dgraph instance. This is a useful
# for small examples such as this since it puts Dgraph into a clean state.
op = pydgraph.Operation(drop_all=True)
client.alter(op)
```

### Creating a Transaction

To create a transaction, call `DgraphClient#txn()` method, which returns a
new `Txn` object. This operation incurs no network overhead.

It is good practice to call `Txn#discard()` in a `finally` block after running
the transaction. Calling `Txn#discard()` after `Txn#commit()` is a no-op
and you can call `Txn#discard()` multiple times with no additional side-effects.

```python
txn = client.txn()
try:
  # Do something here
  # ...
finally:
  txn.discard()
  # ...
```

To create a read-only transaction, call `DgraphClient#txn(read_only=True)`.
Read-only transactions are ideal for transactions which only involve queries.
Mutations and commits are not allowed.

```python
txn = client.txn(read_only=True)
try:
  # Do some queries here
  # ...
finally:
  txn.discard()
  # ...
```

To create a read-only transaction that executes best-effort queries, call
`DgraphClient#txn(read_only=True, best_effort=True)`. Best-effort queries are
faster than normal queries because they bypass the normal consensus protocol.
For this same reason, best-effort queries cannot guarantee to return the latest
data. Best-effort queries are only supported by read-only transactions.

### Running a Mutation

`Txn#mutate(mu=Mutation)` runs a mutation. It takes in a `Mutation` object,
which provides two main ways to set data: JSON and RDF N-Quad. You can choose
whichever way is convenient.

`Txn#mutate()` provides convenience keyword arguments `set_obj` and `del_obj`
for setting JSON values and `set_nquads` and `del_nquads` for setting N-Quad
values. See examples below for usage.

We define a person object to represent a person and use it in a transaction.

```python
# Create data.
p = {
    'name': 'Alice',
}

# Run mutation.
txn.mutate(set_obj=p)

# If you want to use a mutation object, use this instead:
# mu = pydgraph.Mutation(set_json=json.dumps(p).encode('utf8'))
# txn.mutate(mu)

# If you want to use N-Quads, use this instead:
# txn.mutate(set_nquads='_:alice <name> "Alice" .')
```

```python
# Delete data.

query = """query all($a: string)
 {
   all(func: eq(name, $a))
    {
      uid
    }
  }"""

variables = {'$a': 'Bob'}

res = txn.query(query, variables=variables)
ppl = json.loads(res.json)

# For a mutation to delete a node, use this:
txn.mutate(del_obj=person)
```

For a complete example with multiple fields and relationships, look at the
[simple] project in the `examples` folder.

Sometimes, you only want to commit a mutation, without querying anything further.
In such cases, you can set the keyword argument `commit_now=True` to indicate
that the mutation must be immediately committed.

A mutation can be executed using `txn.do_request` as well.

```python
mutation = txn.create_mutation(set_nquads='_:alice <name> "Alice" .')
request = txn.create_request(mutations=[mutation], commit_now=True)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Committing a Transaction

A transaction can be committed using the `Txn#commit()` method. If your transaction
consisted solely of calls to `Txn#query` or `Txn#queryWithVars`, and no calls to
`Txn#mutate`, then calling `Txn#commit()` is not necessary.

An error is raised if another transaction(s) modify the same data concurrently that was
modified in the current transaction. It is up to the user to retry transactions
when they fail.

```python
txn = client.txn()
try:
  # ...
  # Perform any number of queries and mutations
  # ...
  # and finally...
  txn.commit()
except Exception as e:
  if isinstance(e, pydgraph.AbortedError):
    # Retry or handle exception.
  else:
    raise e
finally:
  # Clean up. Calling this after txn.commit() is a no-op
  # and hence safe.
  txn.discard()
```

### Running a Query

You can run a query by calling `Txn#query(string)`. You will need to pass in a
GraphQL+- query string. If you want to pass an additional dictionary of any
variables that you might want to set in the query, call
`Txn#query(string, variables=d)` with the variables dictionary `d`.

The response would contain the field `json`, which returns the response JSON.

Let’s run a query with a variable `$a`, deserialize the result from JSON and
print it out:

```python
# Run query.
query = """query all($a: string) {
  all(func: eq(name, $a))
  {
    name
  }
}"""
variables = {'$a': 'Alice'}

res = txn.query(query, variables=variables)

# If not doing a mutation in the same transaction, simply use:
# res = client.txn(read_only=True).query(query, variables=variables)

ppl = json.loads(res.json)

# Print results.
print('Number of people named "Alice": {}'.format(len(ppl['all'])))
for person in ppl['all']:
  print(person)
```

This should print:

```console
Number of people named "Alice": 1
Alice
```

You can also use `txn.do_request` function to run the query.

```python
request = txn.create_request(query=query)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Running an Upsert: Query + Mutation

The `txn.do_request` function allows you to run upserts consisting of one query and
one mutation. Query variables could be defined and can then be used in the mutation.

To know more about upsert, we highly recommend going through the docs at
https://docs.dgraph.io/mutations/#upsert-block.

```python
query = """{
  u as var(func: eq(name, "Alice"))
}"""
nquad = """
  uid(u) <name> "Alice" .
  uid(u) <age> "25" .
"""
mutation = txn.create_mutation(set_nquads=nquad)
request = txn.create_request(query=query, mutations=[mutation], commit_now=True)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Running a Conditional Upsert

The upsert block also allows specifying a conditional mutation block using an `@if` directive. The mutation is executed
only when the specified condition is true. If the condition is false, the mutation is silently ignored.

See more about Conditional Upsert [Here](https://docs.dgraph.io/mutations/#conditional-upsert).

```python
query = """
  {
    user as var(func: eq(email, "wrong_email@dgraph.io"))
  }
"""
cond = "@if(eq(len(user), 1))"
nquads = """
  uid(user) <email> "correct_email@dgraph.io" .
"""
mutation = txn.create_mutation(cond=cond, set_nquads=nquads)
request = txn.create_request(mutations=[mutation], query=query, commit_now=True)
txn.do_request(request)
```

### Cleaning Up Resources

To clean up resources, you have to call `DgraphClientStub#close()` individually for
all the instances of `DgraphClientStub`.

```python
SERVER_ADDR = "localhost:9080"

# Create instances of DgraphClientStub.
stub1 = pydgraph.DgraphClientStub(SERVER_ADDR)
stub2 = pydgraph.DgraphClientStub(SERVER_ADDR)

# Create an instance of DgraphClient.
client = pydgraph.DgraphClient(stub1, stub2)

# ...
# Use client
# ...

# Clean up resources by closing all client stubs.
stub1.close()
stub2.close()
```

### Setting Metadata Headers
Metadata headers such as authentication tokens can be set through the metadata of gRPC methods. Below is an example of how to set a header named "auth-token".
```python
# The following piece of code shows how one can set metadata with
# auth-token, to allow Alter operation, if the server requires it.
# metadata is a list of arbitrary key-value pairs.
metadata = [("auth-token", "the-auth-token-value")]
dg.alter(op, metadata=metadata)
```

### Setting a timeout.

A timeout value representing the number of seconds can be passed to the `login`,
`alter`, `query`, and `mutate` methods using the `timeout` keyword argument.

For example, the following alters the schema with a timeout of ten seconds:
`dg.alter(op, timeout=10)`

### Passing credentials

A `CallCredentials` object can be passed to the `login`, `alter`, `query`, and
`mutate` methods using the `credentials` keyword argument.

### Authenticating to a reverse TLS proxy

If the Dgraph instance is behind a reverse TLS proxy, credentials can also be
passed through the methods available in the gRPC library. Note that in this case
every request will need to include the credentials. In the example below, we are
trying to add authentication to a proxy that requires an API key. This value is
expected to be included in the metadata using the key "authorization".

```
creds = grpc.ssl_channel_credentials()
call_credentials = grpc.metadata_call_credentials(
    lambda context, callback: callback((("authorization", "<api-key>"),), None))
composite_credentials = grpc.composite_channel_credentials(creds, call_credentials)
client_stub = pydgraph.DgraphClientStub(
    '{host}:{port}'.format(host=GRPC_HOST, port=GRPC_PORT), composite_credentials)
client = pydgraph.DgraphClient(client_stub)
```

### Async methods.

The `alter` method in the client has an asyncronous version called
`async_alter`. The async methods return a future. You can directly call the
`result` method on the future. However. The DgraphClient class provides a static
method `handle_alter_future` to handle any possible exception.

```
alter_future = self.client.async_alter(pydgraph.Operation(
	schema="name: string @index(term) ."))
response = pydgraph.DgraphClient.handle_alter_future(alter_future)
```

The `query` and `mutate` methods int the `Txn` class also have async versions
called `async_query` and `async_mutation` respectively. These functions work
just like `async_alter`.

You can use the `handle_query_future` and `handle_mutate_future` static methods
in the `Txn` class to retrieve the result. A short example is given below:

```
txn = client.txn()
query = "query body here"
future = txn.async_query()
response = pydgraph.Txn.handle_query_future(future)
```

A working example can be found in the `test_asycn.py` test file.

Keep in mind that due to the nature of async calls, the async functions cannot
retry the request if the login is invalid. You will have to check for this error
and retry the login (with the function `retry_login` in both the `Txn` and
`Client` classes). A short example is given below:

```python
client = DgraphClient(client_stubs) # client_stubs is a list of gRPC stubs.
alter_future = client.async_alter()
try:
    response = alter_future.result()
except Exception as e:
	# You can use this function in the util package to check for JWT
    # expired errors.
    if pydgraph.util.is_jwt_expired(e):
        # retry your request here.
```

## Examples

- [simple][]: Quickstart example of using pydgraph.

## Development

### Building the source

```sh
python setup.py install
# To install for the current user, use this instead:
# python setup.py install --user
```

If you have made changes to the `pydgraph/proto/api.proto` file, you need need
to regenerate the source files generated by Protocol Buffer tools. To do that,
install the [grpcio-tools][grpcio-tools] library and then run the following
command:

[grpcio-tools]: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/grpcio-tools

```sh
python scripts/protogen.py
```

The generated file `api_pb2_grpc.py` needs to be changed in recent versions of python.
The required change is outlined below as a diff.

```
-import api_pb2 as api__pb2
+from . import api_pb2 as api__pb2
```

### Running tests

To run the tests in your local machine, you can run the script
`scripts/local-tests.sh`. This script assumes Dgraph and dgo (Go client) are
already built on the local machine and that their code is in `$GOPATH/src`.
It also requires that docker and docker-compose are installed in your machine.

The script will take care of bringing up a Dgraph cluster and bringing it down
after the tests are executed. The script uses the port 9180 by default to
prevent interference with clusters running on the default port. Docker and
docker-compose need to be installed before running the script. Refer to the
official Docker documentation for instructions on how to install those packages.

The `test.sh` script downloads and installs Dgraph. It is meant for use by our
CI systems and using it for local development is not recommended.
